PEP: 9999
Title: Imaginary type and IEC 60559-compatible complex arithmetic
Author: Sergey B Kirpichev <skirpichev@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Pending
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 05-Dec-2023
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `10-Sep-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/33433>`__,
              `14-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/77073>`__


Abstract
========

Introduce new imaginary type and mixed rules for complex number arithmetics.


Motivation
==========

Complex numbers were part of the Python language from very early releases
(since v1.2 in the stdlib and since v1.3 as the
:external+py3.14:class:`complex` builtin).  But until recently their
implementation was simplistic, based on approach (dating back to early versions
of the Fortran) that just adds complex data type as ordered pair of
:external+py3.14:class:`float` numbers, doing arithmetic on them by usual
formulae.  When operands are of mixed types, this assume we first do type
coersions, i.e. conversion of integers and floating-point numbers to complex
numbers with zero (0.0) imaginary component.  The imaginary unit (``1j`` in
Python) in such system is a complex number with zero real component.

Unfortunately, this doesn't work well, if components of the complex number are
floating-point numbers, used as model of the *extended* real line.  Such as
ones, specified by the IEEE standard (IEC 60559), which beyond normal (finite
and nonzero) numbers has special values like signed zero, infinities and nans.
Lets take simple examples with multiplication (where :math:`\rightarrow`
denotes type coersion and :math:`\Rightarrow` is substitution of :math:`0.0+i`
for :math:`i`):

.. math::
   :label: ex-mul1

   2.0 \times (\infty + 3.0 i) & \rightarrow (2.0 + 0.0 i) \times (\infty + 3.0 i) \\
   & = (2.0\times\infty - 0.0\times 3.0) + i(0.0\times\infty + 2.0\times 3.0) \\
   & = \infty + i\mathrm{nan}

.. math::
   :label: ex-mul2

   2.0 i \times (\infty + 3.0 i) & \Rightarrow (0.0 + 2.0 i) \times (\infty + 3.0 i) \\
   & = (0.0\times\infty - 2.0\times 3.0) + i (0.0\times 3.0 + 2.0\times\infty) \\
   & = \mathrm{nan} + i\infty

.. math::
   :label: ex-mul3

   2.0 i \times (-0.0 + 3.0 i) & \Rightarrow (0.0 + 2.0 i) \times (-0.0 + 3.0 i) \\
   & = (-0.0\times 0.0 - 2.0\times 3.0) + i (-2.0\times 0.0 + 0.0\times 3.0) \\
   & = -6.0 + i 0.0

Users with some mathematical background instead would expect, that ``a+bj``
notation in the Python is just usual rectangular form for a complex number with
components ``a`` (real) and ``b`` (imaginary) and that above examples will
work, following rules of elementary algebra (with assumption that :math:`i` is
a symbol such that :math:`i^2=-1`):

.. math::

   2.0 \times (\infty + 3.0 i) & = 2.0\times\infty + i 2.0\times 3.0 = \infty + i 6.0 \\
   2.0 i \times (\infty + 3.0 i) & = -2.0\times 3.0 + i 2.0\times\infty = -6.0 + i\infty \\
   2.0 i \times (-0.0 + 3.0 i) & = -2.0\times 3.0 - i 2.0\times 0.0 = -6.0 - i 0.0 \\


Same affects addition (or subtraction):

.. math::
   :label: ex-add1

   2.0 - 0.0 i & \rightarrow (2.0 + 0.0 i) - 0.0 i \\
               & \Rightarrow (2.0 + 0.0 i) - (0.0 + 0.0 i) \\
               & = 2.0 + 0.0 i

.. math::
   :label: ex-add2

   -0.0 + 2.0 i & \rightarrow (-0.0 + 0.0 i) + 2.0 i \\
               & \Rightarrow (-0.0 + 0.0 i) + (0.0 + 2.0 i) \\
               & = 0.0 + 2.0 i

Simplistic approach for complex arithmetic is underlying reason for numerous
and reccuring issues in the CPython bugtracker (`#84450
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/84450>`__, `#107854
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/107854>`__, `#105027
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/105027>`__, `#70026
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/70026>`__, `#66738
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/66738>`__ or `#61538
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/61538>`__).  Among others, broken
``repr(eval(repr(x))) == repr(x)`` invariant for complex numbers:

.. code:: pycon

   >>> -0.0+1j
   1j
   >>> complex(-0.0, 1)  # note funny signed integer zero
   (-0+1j)


To workaround described behavior, it's required to check operands of
arithmetic expressions and handle special numbers separately.  E.g. you can't
just blindly take analytic identity from the textbook and use it to implement
some mathematical function.  Lets see how this happens already in the stdlib
on `cmath.asin()
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/918e3ba6c0cbb49034a0b03219a2ddd33cb4498b/Modules/cmathmodule.c#L249-L256>`_
example.  Here is a pure-Python version of same code:

.. code:: python

   def asin(z):
       # asin(z) = -i asinh(iz)
       z = complex(-z.imag, z.real)  # z -> iz
       z = cmath.asinh(z)
       return complex(z.imag, -z.real)  # z -> -iz

Note that here we are essentially doing component-wise computations, complex
arithmetic is not used at all.  In other words, being simple to implement ---
it's less useful to end users.

A more modern approach, reflecting advances in the IEEE standard for real
floating-point arithmetic, instead avoid coersion of reals to complexes
(:math:`\rightarrow`) and use a separate data type (imaginary) to represent
the imaginary unit, *ignoring it's real component in arithmetic* (i.e. no
implicit cast (:math:`\Rightarrow`) to a complex number with zero real part).
The ``cmath.asin()`` would be implemented with this approach simply by:

.. code:: python

   def asin(z):
       return -1j*cmath.asinh(1j*z)


It's pioneered by the C99 standard ([2]_, [5]_).  Some mathematical libraries
(like the GNU GSL [1]_) or the GNU MPC) also have special routines to
implement mixed-mode arithmetic for complex numbers, i.e. when one operand
either pure-real or pure-imaginary.  As a side effect, this also introduce
some performance boost for operations with mixed types (e.g. multiplication of
complex and real numbers costs only two real multiplications, not four).

As a first step, `PR#124829 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/124829>`__
added in the CPython 3.14 mixed-mode arithmetic rules for complex, combining
real and complex variables.  So, examples like :eq:`ex-mul1` or :eq:`ex-add1`
now are working correctly:

.. code:: pycon

   >>> from cmath import inf
   >>> 2*(inf+3j)
   (inf+6j)
   >>> 2-0j
   (2-0j)


Unfortunately, this is only a half-way solution.  To fix the rest of above
examples we need a separate type for pure-imaginary values.


Rationale
=========

See [6]_.

special numbers aren't special enough to ignore them (underflow, overflow,
division by zero)

C17 Annex G

Note that removing ([3]_, [4]_) from C2y is irrelevant for us.

https://langdev.stackexchange.com/questions/3508/what-programming-languages-contain-a-built-in-imaginary-data-type


Specification
=============

We need just one pure imaginary constant, i (``1j`` in Python).

``complex(x, y) == x + y*1j``

+----------+------------+--------------+--------------------+
| lhs\/rhs | u          | iv           | u + iv             |
+----------+------------+--------------+--------------------+
| x        | x ± u      | x ± iv       | (x ± u) ± iv       |
+----------+------------+--------------+--------------------+
| iy       | ±u + iy    | i(y ± v)     | ±u + i(y ± v)      |
+----------+------------+--------------+--------------------+
| x + iy   | x ± u + iy | x + i(y ± v) | (x ± u) + i(y ± v) |
+----------+------------+--------------+--------------------+

+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| lhs\/rhs | u              | iv              | u + iv                     |
+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| x        | x*u            | i(x*v)          | (x*u) + i(x*v)             |
+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| iy       | i(y*u)         | -y*v            | (-y*v) + i(y*u)            |
+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| x + iy   | (x*u) + i(y*u) | (-y*v) + i(x*v) | (x*u - y*v) + i(y*u + x*v) |
+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------------------------+

+----------+-----------------------------+
| iy       | -i(1/y)                     |
+----------+-----------------------------+
| x + iy   | (x - i*y)*(1/(x**2 + y**2)) |
+----------+----------------+------------+

N.B. PyPy and GraalPy:
* https://github.com/pypy/pypy/blob/py3.11/rpython/rlib/rcomplex.py
* https://github.com/oracle/graalpython/blob/master/graalpython/com.oracle.graal.python/src/com/oracle/graal/python/builtins/objects/complex/ComplexBuiltins.java

New C-API
---------

* PyImaginaryObject
* PyImaginary_Check()
* PyImaginary_CheckExact()
* PyImaginary_FromDouble()

Imaginary component value could be taken with PyComplex_ImagAsDouble()


It's Not Magic
==============

Examples:

at z = ±2±0j

* atan = lambda z: 1j*(cmath.log(1 - 1j*z) - cmath.log(1 + 1j*z))/2
  - bad imaginary component in both cases

at z = +2±0j

* asin = lambda z: -1j*cmath.log(1j*z + cmath.sqrt(1 - z*z))

at z = -2±0j

* asin = lambda z: 1j*cmath.log(cmath.sqrt(1 - z*z) - 1j*z)


Not a replacement to limit() in CAS!

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> log1p = lambda z: +z - z*z/2  # ln(1+z) up to O(z^3)
   >>> import cmath
   >>> z = 0.25-0j
   >>> cmath.log(1+z)
   (0.22314355131420976-0j)
   >>> log1p(z)
   (0.21875+0j)
   >>> z = 0.25-0j
   >>> cmath.log(1-z)
   (-0.2876820724517809+0j)
   >>> log1m = lambda z: -z - z*z/2  # ln(1-z) up to O(z^3)
   >>> log1m(z)
   (-0.28125+0j)


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Low impact for users: sign of zero, meaningless results replaced

1j*1j -> float (not complex)


How to Teach This
=================

Semantics more close to usual mathematical notation.


Reference Implementation
========================

https://github.com/skirpichev/cpython/pull/1


Rejected Ideas
==============

* AST transformation


Open Issues
===========

* imaginary() builtin? (``imaginary(foo) == float(foo)*1j``)

* special form of the complex constructor, instead of the subtype

Footnotes
=========

.. [1] https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/doc/html/complex.html#complex-arithmetic-operators

.. [2] /home/sk/ToDo/n3215.pdf

.. [3] /home/sk/ToDo/n3274.pdf

.. [4] https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/60269

.. [5] /home/sk/ToDo/C99RationaleV5.10.pdf, p184

.. [6] W. Kahan and J. W. Thomas.  Augmenting a Programming
       Language with Complex Arithmetic.  Technical Report UCB/CSD
       91/667, Univ. of Calif. at Berkeley, December, 1991.
       http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/1992/CSD-92-667.pdf


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
